History of Search Engines

Google has become synonyms for research nowadays. It is not only a search engine anymore but “to google” has become a verb. “Oh, you have to write a note on the history of search engines? Just google it!” But Google came long after the first search engine came into existence.
Before we get into the history of search engines, we must understand how a search engine works.
Very broadly speaking – a search engine takes as input a query that the user submits, search the keywords present in the query in some knowledge base that the search engine creates by indexing the web pages. Extract relevant information and return the results to the user. This whole process is called information retrieval.
The story of search engines started in the year 1945 when Vannevar Bush wrote an article – “As we may think” which published in “The Atlantic Monthly.” In the article, Bush asked the scientists to create a knowledge base for all humanity. He wrote – “A record, if it is to be useful to science, must be continuously extended, it must be stored, and above all, it must be consulted.” He also introduced the idea of an infinite, efficient and reliable storage and retrieval system which he called “memex.”
Then after almost two decades, Gerard Salton, also known as the father of modern search, along with his team at Harvard and Cornell developed a SMART information retrieval system. A few modern search engines still use some of the ideas that Salton had proposed.
Then came the idea of computer networks. 1969 showed us ARPANET which later became the basis for the modern-day Internet. Now that we had an internet we needed a way to retrieve information efficiently. Thus came the first-ever search engine named – “Archie.”
In 1990 Alan Emtage of McGill University, Montreal created Archie. Archie indexed FTP sites to create an index of files the user may want. The index was locally stored, and searching was done using ‘grep’ command in Unix. Since the storage was local, it was limited. Thus, the storage comprised of only the listings rather than the whole files.
Shortly after Archie, Veronica followed which was further followed by Jughead. Steven Foster and Fred Barrie of the University of Nevada, Reno created the search engine, Veronica, in 1992. Veronica followed the ‘Gopher protocol.’ Gopher protocol works on TCP/IP application layer. Its responsibilities include distributing, searching and retrieving documents over the Internet.
In 1993, Rhett Jones of the University of Utah developed Jughead. Jughead is a search engine that follows the Gopher protocol same as Veronica, the only difference being that Jughead searches a single server at a time.
In 1993 itself, Matthew Gray created the World Wide Web Wanderer. The World Wide Web Wanderer was the web’s first robot. A computer robot is a nothing but a small program that performs repetitive tasks automatically with high speed. The World Wide Web Wanderer was initially made to measure the growth of the web by counting active web servers. Soon, the bot was remodeled to capture actual URL’s. The Wanderer’s database is called Wandex. However, the Wanderer caused lag because it accessed the same page hundreds of times in a day.
Again in 1993, Martijn Koster introduced ALIWEB (Archie Like Indexing of the Web). ALIWEB crawled meta-information (tags that describe the page’s content). It also allowed users to submit their web pages to be indexed. ALIWEB needed no bot and also didn’t need excessive bandwidth. But there was a downside – people were not very familiar with submitting their sites.
In 1994, David Filo and Jerry Yang introduced the Yahoo! Directory. The Yahoo! Directory originally contained a list of David’s and Jerry’s favourite web pages but as the number of web pages grew the directory had to be made searchable giving rise to yet another search engine. This engine was more popular than Wanderer because of a human-compiled description of each URL.
In 1994 itself, Michale Mauldin of Carnegie Mellon University created Lycos. Lycos was more intelligent than any search engine until now. Lycos retrieves information based on ranked relevance. Prefix matching and word proximity techniques are used to process keywords.
In 1995, Looksmart, yet another search engine, came into existence. Looksmart was a competitor for Yahoo! Directory. It works on a pay per click basis.
AltaVista came out in 1995. It was a widely used search engine. It was smart and allowed for natural language queries. It incorporated advanced searching techniques. People could add or delete their URL’s.
1996 saw the beginning of Google. In 1996, Larry Page and Sergey Brin created a search engine called BackRub. BackRub engine had a special characteristic of utilizing the information of backlinks (thus, the name) for searching. It uses a ranking mechanism that ranks pages by the number of web pages that links to it.
In 1996, Garret Gruener and David Warthen created Ask Jeeves (later known as Ask.com). The queries of Ask Jeeves were in natural language. Ask Jeeves also ranked their links by popularity, though this approach was easy to spam. One of its more interesting features was that Ask Jeeves grouped the sites according to the subject they were on.
Google launched in 1998. Later Google received funding from various sources and in 2000 AOL selected Google as one of its search partners. In 2000 only, Google launched its Google toolbar, and since then, Google has been ruling the search market.
In the field of technology, the future has always been more important as compared to the past. The future of search engine includes machine learning, artificial intelligence, personalization, etc. Google’s RankBrain algorithm already incorporates these technologies to some extent. The algorithm tries to find out what the user wants rather than what the user says it wants.
As the Internet is bigger than it has ever been, the need for proper information retrieval is also at its prime. Internet will keep on growing, and thus the search techniques should also keep on upgrading. The future is exciting and full of new possibilities.
