                         History of Search Engine 

According to Tim Berners-Lee, creator of the World Wide Web, "The Internet is a network of 
networks”. Basically it is made from computers and cables. The Web is an abstract imaginary 
space of information. On the Net we can find computers which are connected to each other, we 
can find documents, sounds, videos and other information. On the Net, the connections are 
cables or wireless medium between computers. On the Web, connections are hypertext links. 
With information being shared worldwide, there was eventually a need to find that information in 
an orderly manner. Hence there is a requirement of a search engine. 
These are the search engines according to time line:- 
Archie:The earliest versions of Archie, written by Alan Emtage, simply contacted a list of 
FTP archives on a regular basis (contacting each roughly once a month, so as not to waste too 
many resources of the remote servers) and requested a listing. These listings were stored in local 
files to be searched using the UNIX grep command. 
Lycos was created as a university project, but was the first to attain commercial search 
engine success. In 1999 Lycos was the most visited search engine in the world and was 
available in 40 countries. Now it is currently comprised of a social network with email, 
webhosting and media entertainment pages. 
Yahoo started at Stanford University by Jerry Yang and David Filo (both electrical 
engineering grad students) that became a web portal and search engine. 
WebCrawler created by Brian Pinkerton WebCrawler was the first crawler which indexed 
complete pages online. AOL purchased WebCrawler, using the technology for their network, 
and when Excite purchased WebCrawler, AOL used Excite to run their program NetFind. 
WebCrawler was one of the foundational search engines. 
AltaVista an industry leader, was once the most popular search engines of its time. It 
differed from its contemporaries because of two factors: Alta Vista used a multi-threaded 
crawler (Scooter) that covered more web pages than people knew existed at the time. It also 
had a well-organized search-running back-end advanced hardware. By 1996 AltaVista had 
become the sole search results provider for Yahoo. In 2003 Alta Vista was bought by Overture 
Services, Inc., which only months later was acquired by Yahoo. 
Looksmart competed with Yahoo! Directory and had an initial a goal to create a 
substantial directory of websites. When it went public in 1999, it lost a fair amount of customers. 
By 2002 Looksmart became a pay-per-click provider, and after being dropped by Microsoft, 
bought a search engine called WiseNut. Sadly it never gained serious traction, and Looksmart 
lost its momentum. 
WiseNut was a crawler-based search engine that was introduced as a beta, and was 
owned by Looksmart. Initially the site was well reputed with an unsullied database, and an 
automatic clustering of search results by using a technology called WiseGuide. Looksmart 
bought WiseNut in 2002, and was eventually closed in 2007. 
Excite Founded originally as "Architext" by Stanford University students, Excite was 
launched officially having purchased two search engines (Magellan and WebCrawler), and 
signed exclusive agreements with Microsoft and Apple. Fellow Stanford students Larry Page 
and Sergey Brin once offered to sell their startup "Google" to the Excite team for $1 million, 
which was refused. Google became a $180 billion company, and Excite is now used as a 
personal portal called My Excite. 
Hotbot a search engine also popular in the 90's was launched by Wired Magazine, and 
is now owned by Lycos. 
Dogpile was a search engine developed by Aaron Flin and shortly thereafter sold to 
Go2net. Now Dogpile fetches results from Google, Yahoo, and Yandex. 
Google Started for a research project by Stanford students Larry Page and Sergey Brin. 
They created a search engine that would rank websites based on the number of other websites 
that linked to that page. Prior to this, other engines have ranked sites based on the number of 
times the search term appeared on the webpage. This strategy developed the world's most 
successful search engine today. 
MSN Search was the engine used by Microsoft, sourcing search results from Inktomi, 
and later Looksmart. By 2006 Micosoft started performing their owns mage searches, and MSN 
became branded as Windows Live Search, then Live Search, and finally to Bing (2009) which 
was set to replace the Yahoo search engine. 


 

 


