HISTORY OF SEARCH ENGINE

Before knowing the history of search engine we must understand, what really search engine is? So, the search is a
program where you place your query/problem and it provides you with desired solution by looking at
database/servers.


It all started in 1990, when the first search engine ARCHIE was invented by Alan Emtage, Bill Heelan and J. Peter
Deutsch. Archie was just capable of downloading the directory listings of all the files located on File Transfer
Protocol sites and it just provided the user with the filename not the content.


In 1993, JUMPSTATION, the first WWW search engine came into picture. It used the titles and headings of the
documents to index the web pages. It used linear search to find the web pages. It searched results on the basis of
input provided by the user and output the listing of urls that matches the keywords of the input.

Then, YAHOO came in 1994 which was invented by Jerry Yang and David Filo. The site was the first collection of
web pages across the internet. They include Man-made descriptions for the URLs. For Site owners it was free to
add Informational sites, but commercial sites it was paid.


In the same year when Yahoo was launched two more search engine was also launched WebCrawler and Excite.

WebCrawler was the first search engine that indexed whole page means full text search. Excite invented bought
WebCrawler in 1996.It provided features like instant messaging ,weather report, news report,metasearch.


Lycos search engine was also established in 1995.It enjoyed several years of growth and became the most visited
 site in the world. Till 1998, Lycos was the
largest search engine.


After Lycos then came Askjeeves search engine. In this search engine humans answered the query that was
posted by the user. Now, it is known with a name of Ask.com. Facing immense competition with other search
engines like google Ask.com launched a Q&A community for generating answers from real people.


In 1998, Google launched,which was invented by Larry Page and Sergey Berin. Both Page and Berin developed the
PageRank algorithm. Convinced that the pages with the most links to them from other highly relevant Web pages
must be the most relevant pages associated with the search, Page and Berin tested their thesis as part of their
studies, and laid the foundation for their search engine. Now, Google is the most widely used web based search
engine.From 1998,Google has never looked back it is now the most widely used search engine. After Pagerank
algorithm, Google used Panda algorithm to reward high-quality websites and diminish the presence of low-quality
websites in Google’s organic search engine results.After that google again updated their algorithm to Penguin
algorithm which was improved version of Panda.


Microsoft launched their first search engine named-MSN search engine using search results. It consisted of a web
crawler, index, and search engine . After that, MSN Search launched a improved version which displayed listings
from Looksmart with the results from Inktomi but for a short time after that the results from AltaVista were used.
Now, it is known with the name of Bing search engine which is developed in Asp.net.

