Text Analytics Assignment 1 
HISTORY OF SEARCH ENGINES
Introduction: Search Engines
To begin with, a search engine is a tool or a service that users can use to search for content that they require. Simply, the user enters or commands through voice certain keywords or phrases to receive a list of data available online such as documents, books, images, etc. 


To attain this simple task a search engine has two components : a spider or crawler and algorithm. But before reaching this design, many search engine designs have been tried. Earlier search engines relied on page contents largely, but as new algorithms and technologies like machine learning came into being, search results now returned are highly variable in nature. 
The Pre-Web Search Engines : 1990-1991
Archie
It has been described as the pre-web search engine. Created by Alan Emtage, Bill Heelan and J. Peter Deutsch.
Search Type : It searched FTP Sites to create an index of all the files downloaded. It had a space issue. Hence, the search was entirely based on list headers rather than the page content.
Veronica and Jughead
After Archie, two new search engines came into being : Veronica and Jughead. These two were based on Gopher Indexed System.
Search Type : VERONICA(Very Easy Rodent-Oriented NetWide Index to Computerized Archives) used Gopher’s menu titles. The keywords entered were matched with words in Gopher’s entire listing.
Meanwhile, Jughead was used to obtain information from a specific server. 
Developing World Wide Web Virtual Library - 1992
Tim Berner Lee had setup a Virtual Library (VLib).  This library was hosted on CERN’s Web Server. It was a loose collection of topic-wise link-list. Each one maintained by the topic-expert. The CERN’s Web Servers contained listing of web server.
Earlier Search Engines : 1993
First Web Robot : World Wide Web Wanderer
Created by Matthew Gray, it was only a robot meant to create index of the world wide web. It was not meant for search. The technology was developed in Perl.
First Web Search Engine : W3 Catalog 
Oscar Nierstrasz released W3Catalog. 
Search type : It used a high quality existing list of websites instead of crawlers and indexes. But, a major performance degradation was caused when the bot accessed same pages hundreds of time in same day.
AllWeb 
Contributed by Martijn koster. 
Search Type : No web robots used. Rather the system was notified by web-admin of the site’s existence on an index file.
Other Primitive Searches
1. JumpStation was created by Jonathon Fletcher. 
Search Type : Linear Search on the resource directory containing headers. Contained crawler, indexes and search feature.
1. World Wide Web Worm searched on indexes titles and URLs .No RANK system used.
2. RBSE Spider : it used exact title matches and had a rating system.
New Web Search Engines : 1994 onwards
1994-2000
1. 1994 
   1. Infoseek : a page could be submitted in real time.
   2. Web Crawler : Created by Brian Pinkerton. Search Type : Search for any word.
   3. Yahoo ! :  A utility to other search engines. Yahoo is a web directory.
   4. Lycos : Designed by Michael Loren Mauldin. A simple search engine research project.
1. 1995 
   1. LookSmart : A web directory. 
   2. AltaVista : Search Type : Allows Natural Language and gives search tips. Domains can be added and deleted within 24 hours.
1. 1996
   1. BackRub : Created by Larry Page and Sergey Brin. It is a web crawler. Search Type : Used backlinks to search. And pages were ranked based on citation notation.
   2. HotBot : An engine by Inktomi.
   3. Popular Engine: A version of Direct Hit Technologies : Gary Culliss and Steven Yang designed it. This search engine ranks pages/results based on selections previously made.
1. 1997
   1. Ask Jeeves : Search Type : Based on natural language. Ranks documents on popularity. 
   2. Google.com is registered. Based on BACKLINK Model.
1. 1998
   1. Overture : Formerly Goto.com. Provided pay per click service.
   2. MSN Search/Bing : Search Type : search results generated by Overture, Looksmart, and Inktomi. 
   3. Popular Engine: Direct Hit Technologies in partnership with Hotbot released it. Results were based on prior user searches.
1. 1999
   1. AlltheWeb : Sleek Interface with Advanced features Based on FTP Search project of Tor Egge.
2000-2006
1. 2004
   1. MSN Search : Microsoft uses its own indexer instead of Inktomi and Looksmart.
   2. Google Suggest is launched as Google Labs.
1. 2005
   1. Webmaster’s Collectively introduce Nofollow attribute to combat spam link.
   2. Snap : Created by Bill Gross. Allows many features such as : display of search volumes, sophisticated auto-completion etc.
2006-2012
1. 2006-9
   1. Wikia Search : By Wikia. Search Type :based on human curation.
1. 2008
   1. Cuil : Search Type : uses picture thumbnails to display search results
1. 2009
   1. Search Algorithm Update: Caffeine: can crawl fast, index expansion becomes easier and ranking and indexing can be maintained in real time.
1. 2010
   1. Google Instant or search-before-you-type feature: Google tries to predict the query user is going to enter.
   2. Blekko : Search Type : slashtags for targeted search.
1. 2011
   1. Web Master Tool : Schema.org : A joint venture to provide targeted search using tag system.
   2. Web Search Algorithm Update : Google Panda an algorithm update to work on cracking down of spam, scrapers, and websites with a high ad-to-content ratio.
2012-2018
1. 2012
   1. Search Plus Your World : Google Tool. Uses integration of social data into search.
   2. Google Penguin:  Algorithm Update for handling Webspam .
   3. Side Bar : Bing’s Update to use users' social networks for information relevant to the search query.
   4. Google’s Search Algorithm Update: Using Knowledge Graph technique to store semantic relationships between objects.
   5. Google Hummingbird :A core algorithm using knowledge graphs.
1. 2015
   1. MobileGeddon : Google released an update to generate mobile friendly pages.
   2. RankBrain : Google uses machine learning to rank pages.
1. 2016
   1. Penguin Algorithm goes real time.
1. 2017
   1. Fred: Google’s update to punish sites having poor backlinks .