SEARCH  ENGINES

INTRODUCTION: Search engine is a program that allows us to search for content via world wide web(WWW). We enter keywords or phrases for the content we want to search 	      and it displays the result in the form of links to certain webpages. The list of content returned via a search engine to a user is known as Search Engine 	      Result Pages(SERP). It has two components:- a web crawler which trolls the web pages for content that is added to search engine’s index and next thing is 	      the search engine algorithm which is used to find the results. Search engines algorithm has grown from being a bit easy in past to become complex. 	      Earlier search results were based largely on page content but now these results are based on hundreds of variables.

HISTORY

1. The first tool used for searching on the internet was Archie. It was created by  Alan Emtage, Bill Heelan and J. Peter Deutsch, computer science students at McGill University in Montreal in 1990. It has downloaded the directory listing of all the files located on public anonymous FTP sites and  reached out to all known openly available FTP sites. But one should have complete knowledge of UNIX commands to use archie to its full capability because commands to search archie were in UNIX.

2. Gopher was the next search engine to arrive at the scene in 1991. It was the menu system with the aim of simplifying locating and using internet resources. Gopher was a protocol system, which in advance of the World Wide Web, allowed server based text files to be hierarchically organized and easily viewed by end users who accessed the server using Gopher Applications on remote computers. Initially gopher was able to display only text based files but later on arrival of hypher gopher made it possible to handle graphic formats.

3. Veronica and Jughead were next on the line. They came in 1991. They were used to search the file names and titles stored in gopher index systems. Its database was a collection of menus from most gopher sites. It builds an on the spot menu consisting of just those items that matched the request made. Veronica would not only present you with a list of Gopher menu items, it would also act like a Gopher. Jughead on the other hand was distinct from Veronica. Jughead searched a single server at a time. It  indexed the servers quickly so it was used to builds its database in memory. When Jughead used all of the available memory, it used to become unacceptably slow, limiting the size the servers it can index.

4. W3 catalog and wanderer was one of the first search engines that attempted to provide a general searchable catalog for world wide web resources. It exploited the fact that many high quality maintained web pages were already available. Its catalog just mirrored those pages, reformatted the contents into individual entries and provided a perl based front end to enable dynamic querying.

5. Aliweb appeared in the month of November in 1993. It allowed users to submit the locations of index files on their sites which enabled the search engine to include WebPages and add user-written page descriptions and keywords. It has provided the users with a tool which allows them to keep track of the services provided by it in a manner that automatic programs could simply pick up their descriptions and combine them into a searchable database.

6. Jumpstation was released in December 1993. It was the first WWW resource discovery tool to combine the three essential features of a web search engine i.e. crawling, indexing and searching. Because of the limited resources available on the platform on which jump station ran, its indexing and searching were limited to the titles and headings found in the web pages the crawler encountered.

7. Webcrawler  was started by Brian Pinkerton in 1994. Initially it was a desktop application and not a web service. It went live with a database containing pages from just over 4000 different web sites. Webcrawler was the first Web search engine to provide full text search. It was unique in that it was the first web robot that was capable of indexing every word on a web page, while other bots were storing a URL, a title and at most 100 words.

8. Alta-Vista was introduced in 1995. Credit for creation of these engines goes to Louis Monier, for writing the crawler, and Michael Burrows, for writing the indexer. It was backed by the most powerful computing server available. AltaVista was the fastest search engine and has the ability to handle millions of hits a day without any degradation.

9. Dogpile, Inktomi and Hotbot were few famous search engines in 1996. Dogpile began operation in November 1996. The site was developed by Aaron Finn. Dogpile was a metasearch site. It was used to search multiple engines, filtered for duplicates and then it presents its results to the user. Hotbot was introduced in 1996 in the month of may. It was the first search engine to search within the search results. It also offered free webpage hosting but only for a short period of time. HotBot proved itself to be one of the most powerful search engines of its day, with a spider capable of indexing 10 million pages a day.

10. Google (1998) had its rise to the path of success in large part starting from 1998 due to a patented algorithm called page rank. Page rank  helps rank web pages that match a given search string. Previous keyword-based methods of ranking search results, used by many search engines would used to rank pages by how often the search terms occurred in any particular page, or how strongly associated the search terms were within each resulting page. The PageRank algorithm used by Google, instead used to analyze human generated links, assuming that web pages linked from many important pages are themselves likely to be important. The algorithm computes a recursive score for pages based on the weighted sum of the page ranks of the pages linking to them. It not only indexes and caches web pages but also takes snapshots of other file types, including PDF, Word documents, Excel spreadsheets, Flash SWF, plain text files, and so on.

11. Yahoo search is a web search engine owned by yahoo Inc. originally. It started as a web directory of other websites organized in a hierarchy, as opposed to a searchable index of pages. In the late 1990s, Yahoo! evolved into a full-fledged portal with a search interface.

12. Bing was introduced in 2009. It is a web service engine from Microsoft. Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer unveiled it on 28 May 2009 at the All Things digital conference in San Diego. June 3, 2009, was the day when it fully went online with a preview version released on June 1, 2009. Changes that were notable include the listing of search suggestions as queries are entered and a list of related searches based on semantic technology from Powerset that Microsoft purchased in the year of 2008.
 

